Camera (#36)
Lokathor/learn-gfx-hal: book/src/08_camera.md

So in this lesson we'll first show an Orthographic Projection matrix, and then
we'll focus on two different camera types.

Side Note: Within math in general there _are_ also other types of transformation
besides translate, rotate, and scale. However, we don't use them in our graphics
programming.

## Quick Patch

I've forgotten until now, but there's an important little bit you'll want to
know about on Windows. There's a special attribute that you can set on your
program to make it not have an attached console. This makes it so that if you
run the program from outside of a terminal it won't open up a dummy terminal in
the background.

`windows_subsystem = "windows"`

However, this also makes it so that the program can't do terminal output _even
if_ it was run from a terminal. Since we want to see terminal debug output stuff
in debug builds, we want to only activate this attribute in builds _without_
`debug_assertions`.

```rust
#![cfg_attr(not(debug_assertions), windows_subsystem = "windows")]
```

(Note: if you have `windows_subsystem = "windows"` set on a program and run it
from the command line of a terminal _other than_ `cmd.exe` and PowerShell (eg:

> GitBash) you might still get terminal output. But you have to ask yourself, who

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Git Bash) you might still get terminal output. But you have to ask yourself, who
```

Reviewer 2: Feel free to ask if you have any questions about the formulas I gave him and he posted.

# Camera

Now that we've got everything in the right coordinate system, let's play around
a little bit with that.

As a review:

> * The Model Matrix places the model into the world

Reviewer 3: I think even better would be

* The Model Matrix defines the transformation which takes an object from Model space and places it into World space, changing its location, scale, rotation, etc. within the world.

> * The View Matrix defines _where the camera is_

Reviewer 3: * The View Matrix defines the transformation which takes an object from World space and puts it into View space. It is *not* the camera's 'model matrix', but rather the transformation required to move an object to where it would be relative to an unmoving camera at the origin if the camera *had* been transformed.

> * The View Matrix defines _where the camera is_

Author: I got some new language for this section that I think works well.

* The Projection Matrix defines _the lens of the camera_

So this lesson we'll play around with the View matrix and the Projection matrix
a tiny bit.

## Quick Patch

I've forgotten until now, but there's an important little bit you'll want to
know about on Windows. There's a special attribute that you can set on your
program to make it not have an attached console. This makes it so that if you
run the program from outside of a terminal it won't open up a dummy terminal in
the background.

`windows_subsystem = "windows"`

> However, this also makes it so that the program can't do terminal output _even

Author: Noted and updated

if_ it was run from a terminal. Since we want to see terminal debug output stuff
in debug builds, we want to only activate this attribute in builds _without_
`debug_assertions`.

```rust
#![cfg_attr(not(debug_assertions), windows_subsystem = "windows")]
```

# Orthographic Projection

> I mentioned it in passing before, but there's a second major category of

Reviewer 3: 👍

> I mentioned it in passing before, but there's a second major category of

Author: I did give a longer explanation last lesson actually, though I suppose it could use review here

> I mentioned it in passing before, but there's a second major category of

Author: Fixed up a bit with linked to the WP article on 3d projection added

    local_state.orthographic_projection
  } else {
    local_state.perspective_projection
  };
  let view_projection = projection * local_state.view;
  hal_state.draw_cubes_frame(&view_projection, &local_state.cubes)
}
```

Now we can see how ugly an orthographic projection is!

Well, it's not always ugly, but we'd really need to have a different sort of
scene of stuff to look at if we wanted it to look good. Unfortunately that's a
little out of scope at the moment, so I'll leave trying that out up to you now
that you know what to do. Right now I just wanted you to know that it's
_possible_, and let you have a sense of why the `view` and `projection` matrix
data isn't always just a single matrix based on the camera position.

# Euler Angle Camera

Ultimately a camera is just about picking a **location** and **orientation** of
where you're looking at things from. However, there's actually two major types
of camera similar to how there's two major types of projection.

First we'll go over a camera that uses "[Euler
Angles](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Euler_angles)", because it's a little
easier to think about. Euler angles means `pitch`, `roll`, and `yaw`. Like a

> plane. This is often called an "FPS Camera" because it works like in a first

Author: Yeah I'll try to clean that up a bit, `EulerFPSCamera` and `QuaternionFreeCamera`

person game.

* `pitch`: angle up and down
* `roll`: angle rocking side to side
* `yaw`: angle left and right

Actually, I lied just now, we **won't** be handling `roll`. If you allow the
user to adjust their `roll` value as much as they want they can trigger a
[Gimbal Lock](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gimbal_lock). For most first person
experiences you don't need roll at all, so we'll block the user from
accidentally giving themselves problems.

Also, we'll limit the maximum `pitch` value to +/- 89 degrees. You remember that
`up` vector thing from the `look_at` projection? If the `pitch` is allowed to

> hit 90 degrees then the `up` vector and the `front` vector line up and that's a

Reviewer 3: We can actually avoid this by just calculating the view matrix with an inverse like we do with the free camera...

problem too. Again, this users are actually very used to the idea that they
can't just look up more and more until it's flipped over.

Can we avoid those limits? Yes, that's what the second camera style is for.
However, we'll do the simple one first because most of the time it's all you
need and it's easier to understand.

## EulerCamera Struct

So we need a _location_ and _orientation_. Our struct can hold exactly that:

```rust
#[derive(Debug, Clone, Copy)]
pub struct EulerCamera {
  pub position: glm::TVec3<f32>,
  pitch_deg: f32,
  yaw_deg: f32,
}
```

We've got a little extra note there that the pitch and yaw will be in degrees,
because degrees are usually easier for a human to think about, but the `sin` and
`cos` functions are for `radians`, so when we eventually call those we'll need a
conversion first.

Now we declare the "up" vector, which is always the same for this camera style.
Unfortunately, I'm not seeing a `const` function for making a TVec3 value, so
we'll declare the array for the data and then wrap it when we need to I guess.

```rust
impl EulerCamera {
  const UP: [f32; 3] = [0.0, 1.0, 0.0];
```

> Next we want a "front" vector. This is a vector that points forward out of the

Author: [learnopengl.com](https://learnopengl.com/Getting-started/Camera) calls it "front", but i'll put both names.

and then how far the camera was able to move (if it moved). The distance moved
is camera_speed * time_elapsed, but whoever calls `update_position` can just
compute that on their side before they call us.

The way that this works is that we gather up all the deltas that the keys are
trying to get us to do, normalize that total if it's non-zero, and then adjust
our position by that normalized vector times the distance.

```rust
  pub fn update_position(&mut self, keys: &HashSet<VirtualKeyCode>, distance: f32) {
    let up = glm::make_vec3(&Self::UP);
    let forward = self.make_front();
    let cross_normalized = glm::cross::<f32, glm::U3>(&forward, &up).normalize();
    let mut move_vector =
      keys
        .iter()
        .fold(glm::make_vec3(&[0.0, 0.0, 0.0]), |vec, key| match *key {
          VirtualKeyCode::W => vec + forward,
          VirtualKeyCode::S => vec - forward,
          VirtualKeyCode::A => vec + cross_normalized,
          VirtualKeyCode::D => vec - cross_normalized,
          VirtualKeyCode::E => vec + up,
          VirtualKeyCode::Q => vec - up,
          _ => vec,
        });
    if move_vector != glm::zero() {

>       move_vector = move_vector.normalize();

Author: Noted

      self.position += move_vector * distance;
    }
  }
```

I've implemented it as a "flying" camera. It uses the front vector for movement,
so if you look up while going forward then you also move up (depending on
pitch). I've also set `Q` and `E` to shift the camera directly up and down. If
that's not appropriate for your own program then you'd want to compute a forward
vector with just X and Z changes based on `yaw` alone. What you'd probably
actually want is to directly place the camera within the location given to you
by some physics object as it moves through the simulation, and just let the
physics system handle all the position updates. Just assigning to the position
field directly is fine, that's why it's `pub`.

(Note, the `A` and `D` math is sensitive to the fact that the projection matrix
is flipping `Y` values _after_ they pass through the View matrix. In other
words, if you port this code to OpenGL where `Y` is up naturally then you'll
need to flip which one is `+` and which one is `-`, otherwise you'll move
left/right flipped).

Finally, now that we can adjust the details on our camera, we just need to ask
it to please give us the correct view matrix.

```rust

>   pub fn make_view_matrix(&self) -> glm::TMat4<f32> {

Reviewer 3: ```rust
  pub fn make_view_matrix(&self) -> glm::TMat4<f32> {
    let pitch_rad = f32::to_radians(self.pitch_deg);
    let yaw_rad = f32::to_radians(self.yaw_deg);

    let rot = glm::rotate_z(
      &glm::rotate_x(
        &glm::identity(),
        pitch_rad
      ),
      yaw_rad
    );

    let translate = glm::translation(&self.position);

    glm::inverse(translate * rot)
  }
```

Author: Neat, but I think we'll stick with `look_at_lh` since we've already shown it off before.

field and an internal way to track our orientation. In this case it's a
quaternion now.

```rust
#[derive(Debug, Clone, Copy)]
pub struct FreeCamera {
  pub position: glm::TVec3<f32>,
  quat: glm::Qua<f32>,
}
```

And then we add a way to update our orientation. This is like before, but now
we're allowed to pass a `d_roll` value as well. We take the three deltas and
make a delta quaternion. Then we multiply our current quaternion by this to
"update" our orientation by the amounts requested. Remember that quaternion
multiplications are NOT commutative (like matrix multiplications), so the order
here is important. Also, we need to throw in a `quat_normalize` or the
orientation becomes messed up after too many updates (as too much floating point
error accumulates).

```rust
impl FreeCamera {
  pub fn update_orientation(&mut self, d_pitch: f32, d_yaw: f32, d_roll: f32) {
    let delta_quat = glm::quat(d_pitch, d_yaw, d_roll, 1.0);
    self.quat = glm::quat_normalize(&(self.quat * delta_quat));
  }
```

To update the position we do all the basic thing as the EulerCamera did. We sum
up all the directions we're trying to go, check that it's non-zero, if so we

> normalize it. Then there's a change: we can't just adjust the magnitude and then

Reviewer 3: Well, with the Euler angle camera we still did this we just did it in the `make_front` function instead.

Author: Noted and updated

        // This will probably only happen once per frame anyway.
        output.swap_projection = !output.swap_projection;
      }
```

Ya get all that? It's pretty wordy, but that's just the `winit` way to say "Tab
was pressed": KeyboardInput + EventState::Pressed + VirtualKeyCode::Tab.

## Update `LocalState`

Now the `LocalState` will hold two different projection matrices: one for
perspective and one for orthographic. We'll flip which one we use with a bool.

```rust
#[derive(Debug, Clone)]
pub struct LocalState {
  pub frame_width: f64,
  pub frame_height: f64,
  pub mouse_x: f64,
  pub mouse_y: f64,
  pub cubes: Vec<glm::TMat4<f32>>,
  pub view: glm::TMat4<f32>,
  pub perspective_projection: glm::TMat4<f32>,
  pub orthographic_projection: glm::TMat4<f32>,
  pub is_orthographic: bool,
  pub spare_time: f32,
}
```

Which means we add a bit to our "update from user input" method:

```rust
    if input.swap_projection {
      self.is_orthographic = !self.is_orthographic;
    }
```

and now we need to initialize all the new data when we first make the LocalState
value. Once again, `nalgebra-glm` has many different `orthographic` projections

> to pick from, and we want `_lh_zo`. This time instead of picking an aspect ratio

Reviewer: I'm not sure if you've touched on this in an earlier lesson, but maybe we want to explain that `_lh_zo` defines the coordinate system and stands for "left-handed with depth from 0.0 to 1.0"? It's important to use the same coordinate system throughout the program or you will get incorrect results.

Author: Yes, the last lesson did mention `_lh` vs `_lh_zo`

    }
  }
```

To make a view matrix from this we have to expand our quaternion into a rotation
matrix, expand out position into a translation matrix, and then invert
`translation * rotation`. We invert the matrix because what the camera is
actually storing is _its own model matrix_. However, we're not trying to put the
camera in the world, we're trying to send the whole world backwards through the
camera. Uh, if that makes sense?

```rust
  pub fn make_view_matrix(&self) -> glm::TMat4<f32> {
    let rotation = glm::quat_to_mat4(&self.quat);
    let translation = glm::translation(&self.position);
    glm::inverse(&(translation * rotation))
  }
```

And of course want a way to make a FreeCamera from just a position:

```rust
  pub fn at_position(position: glm::TVec3<f32>) -> Self {
    Self {
      position,
      quat: glm::quat_identity(),
    }
  }
```

Now we can finally move through box space in any way that we want!

Almost!

We have to update `LocalState` to have the new camera type, and we also have to
update how it computes the orientation deltas. Specifically, we have to turn the
pitch and yaw changes _way_ down. They're no longer in degrees, they're in...

> uh... well not even Radians I guess. Just... arbitrary units? Anyway, turn the

Reviewer 3: It should be in Radians I believe

Author: So we're here using [nalgebra_glm::quat](https://docs.rs/nalgebra-glm/0.2.1/nalgebra_glm/fn.quat.html), which takes `(x,y,z,w)`, but [this tutorial](http://www.opengl-tutorial.org/intermediate-tutorials/tutorial-17-quaternions/) explains that those values map to

```
// RotationAngle is in radians
x = RotationAxis.x * sin(RotationAngle / 2)
y = RotationAxis.y * sin(RotationAngle / 2)
z = RotationAxis.z * sin(RotationAngle / 2)
w = cos(RotationAngle / 2)
```

So... if you're specifying `x` directly... that's a value partly built from an output of the `sin` function, so it's no longer in Radians, right? Radians would be if we used [nalgebra_glm::quat_angle_axis](https://docs.rs/nalgebra-glm/0.2.1/nalgebra_glm/fn.quat_angle_axis.html) (I think).

Reviewer 3: ... You're right. I didn't realize that is how we were creating the delta quaternion and am a bit surprised that it works, but since we don't actually care about having exact angles rotated here I think it's actually fine.
